Knowing the edit distance between
two strings is important, but
it turns out not to be sufficient.
We often need something more, which
is the alignment between two strings.
We want to know which
symbol in the string x
corresponds to which
symbol in the string y.
And this is going to be important.
for any application we have a beta
distance, often from spell checking
to machine translation,
even in computational biology.
And the way we compute this
alignment is we keep a backtrace.
A backtrace is simply a pointer where we
enter each cell in the matrix that tells
us where we came from.
And when we reach the end, the upper right
corner of our matrix, we can use that
pointer and then trace back through all of
the pointers to read off the alignment.
Let's see how this works in practice.
Again, I've given you the equation for
each cell in edit distance.
And if we put in some of our
values that we saw earlier,
I'll start by putting in some values.
So all right,
so we can ask how did we
get to this value two.
Two is, we picked a minimum of three
values we could either take, so
two is the distance this two here is
the difference between the string i.
And the string e and we got that by
saying, it's either the alignment
between nothing and
e plus the insertion of an extra i.
So that's distance of
one plus one is two Or
0 plus 2 is 2, or 1 plus 1 is 2.
So we have three different values.
So if we were asking which minimum
path did we come from, really,
they're all the same.
We could have come from any of them.
And that's going to be true for
this value of 3, as well.
We computed it as the minimum of 2 plus 1,
1 plus 2, or 2 plus 1.
So it's going to come from here,
here, or here.
And similarly, that's going to be true.
I didn't work out the arithmetic for
you but it's going to be true for
this cell, too.
You can work it out for yourself.
Here, we have a difference.
So the distance between I, N, T, E and E.
We could compute that by
taking the distance, but
it caused us to convert
INTE to nothing and
then add another searching for E but
that would be silly because 4+1=5 and
there is a cheaper way to
get from INTE to E and
that is that it caused us nothing
to march this E to that E.
So, our previous alignment between I and
T and
nothing, we can add zero
from three to get a three.
So, the minimum path for this three,
came from that three so,
while in some cases from
many places in this case.
It unambiguously came from this previous
three, and so we're going to do this for
every array, and
the result will look something like this.
Where we have for every cell every
place it could have come from.
You'll see that in a lot of cases
any path could have worked.
So this 6 could have come from any place,
but crucially this final alignment
this 8 that tells us the final edit
distance between tension and execution.
Our trace back tells us it came from
the best alignment between intense O and
execute O, which came from the best
alignment from intense I and
execute I and so on.
And so we can trace back this alignment
and get ourselves an alignment that tells
us that this n match this n and
this o match this o and so on.
But maybe here we have an insertion
rather than a clean lining up.
Computing the backtrace, very simple.
We take our same minimum edit
distance algorithm that we have seen.
And here,
I have labelled the cases for you.
So, when we are looking at a cell
we are deleting, inserting or
substituting and we simply add pointers.
So, in the case where we
are inserting we point left.
In the case where we are deleting,
we point down.
In the case where we are substituting
we point diagonally I have shown you
the arrows on the previous slide.
So we can look at this distance matrix and
think about the paths from the origin,
here to the end of the matrix.
And any non decreasing path that
goes from the origin to the point
N,M corresponds to some
alignment of the two sequences.
An optimal alignment then is
composed of optimal subsequences,
and that's the idea that makes it possible
to use dynamic programming for this task.
So the resulting of our backtrace
are two strings and
then the alignment between them so
we will know which things line up exactly,
which things line up with substitutions.
And then when we should have insertions,
or deletions.
What's the performance of this algorithm?
In time, it's order nm,
because our distance matrix is of size nm,
and we're filling in each cell one time.
The same is true for space, and
then the back trace, we have to
and in the worst case go for
if we had n deletions and m insertions.
We would have to go n plus m,
with the touch n plus m cells but
not more than that.
So that's our Backtrace algorithms for
computing alignments.